let’s study the charge distribution on metal
bodies in contact , let us understand this
with the example of two metal spheres , say
we are given with 2 metal spheres one is of
radius r1 and , other is of say smaller radius
r2 , and say the 2 are placed far apart , and
the initial charges on these are, q1 and q2.
now if we connect these 2 spheres with the
help of a wire , and along with a switch , then
on closing the switch , some charge flow will
take place , or exchange of charges will take
place between the 2 spheres , if initially
they were at different potentials, and , in
earlier sections we have studied that when
2 bodies at different potentials are connected
.
charge will always flow from high potential
end to the low potential end , now initially
if these 2 are at equal potential no charge
flow will take place , but if they were at
different potential some charge flow will
take place , till the 2 will be at same potential
, we can also write it down as a concept.
that is , after connection . of, 2, charged,
metal bodies , charge exchange takes place
, till . both will be at, same potential , this
is because , when 2 bodies are at different
potentials , the system potential energy will
be more and when the 2 bodies , will be at
same potential, we can say that , their final
potential energy will be , equal .
so in this situation say after connection
the final charges on the spheres will be q1
final , and q2 final , then in this situation
we can say , the potential of spheres, k q1
final by r1 must be equal to , k-q2 final
by r2 . here we can say , if sigma 1 and sigma
2 , be the final . surface density of charge
or the surface charge densities .
on spheres . this implies we can write , q1
final will be sigma 1 multiplied by the area
4 pie r1 square , and q2 final can be written
as sigma 2 multiplied by , 4 pie r2 square
, substituting the values of charges over
here we can see , here k cancels out , substituting
the charges it will be sigma 1 into 4 pie
r1 square by r1 , Is equal to sigma 2 into
4 pie r2 square by , r2 , here 4 pie cancels
out , r1 and r2 also cancels out .
here we are getting sigma 1 r1 is equal to
sigma 2- r2 , it means here we can see that
the product of surface charge density and
the radius remains, constant.
or we can write the surface charge density
is inversely proportional to the, radius of
curvature, of the surface which are at same
potential , so always remember that the surface
charge density on the metal surface , will
always be inversely proportional to their
radius of curvature if these are at, same
potential .
this result will be used ,always whenever
there are same potential surfaces, for same
potential surfaces this will always hold,
this is an important concept for the metal
bodies which are at same potential , always
remember this .